---
layout: post
title: Why I've stopped supporting nVidia
date: 2015-09-04 13:15:16
summary: And why I returned my GeForce GTX 970 for an R9 290.
categories: blog gen
---
If you read [my previous post]({% post_url 2015-08-11-computer %}) you will know I've just built myself a new computer. I've always gone with nVidia for a number of reasons, primarily because I've never tried the alternative. Currently there is indeed only one alternative which is AMD's Radeon lineup, which has its faults, but is (generally) evenly matched with nVidia at all but the enthusiast-grade price points.  This time, I stuck with nVidia as I was told that the Maxwell cards were more modern, more efficient, cooler, and better prepared for DirectX 12.

Until this week, that is. It has been revealed that Maxwell's architecture partially lacks one of the key features needed for true DirectX 12 support[^1], which is asynchronous compute, and it appears the GeForce drivers compensate by emulating it in software. Considering Maxwell has been advertising DirectX-12 readiness as a major feature for the 900 series, this is the latest in a series of events where nVidia has failed to disclose shortcomings of their line-up before people discovered it the hard way. AMD's GCN-based architectures, on the other hand, supports it to a greater degree.

Needless to say, this irritated me to no end. I read about the 3.5 GB-gate issue after I had already bought the 970 which irritated me. nVidia also lied about the ROP count and L2 cache size, which can't be explained by a miscommunication. This already upset my image of the company but I decided it wasn't enough to return it. This recent event, however, crossed the line. I returned my 970 (through Amazon's amazing return service) and got a used R9 290 from eBay for over 100 pounds less than the GTX 970. This means my computer is now within the original budget (of 660 pounds), I have a full 4 GB of video RAM, and I also now know that nVidia should *not* be trusted as a company.

Now I just need to wait for the R9 290 to arrive... thanks for delaying the payment, PayPal!

[^1]: See [here](http://www.dsogaming.com/news/amds-directx-12-advantage-explained-gcn-architecture-more-friendly-to-parallelism-than-maxwell/) and [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/pcgaming/comments/3j1916/get_your_popcorn_ready_nv_gpus_do_not_support/)
